about.md, before:

---
layout: page
title: About
permalink: /about/
---

My name's Ashton Wiersdorf. I hail from Utah; I'm currently studying computer science [Brigham Young University](https://byu.edu). I've sung with the [BYU Men's Chorus](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Choirs_at_Brigham_Young_University) and I play the piano. Other hobbies include swimming and hiking—Utah has some of the most diverse landscape anywhere in the US: from dense forests to baren desert. If you visit I highly recommend checking out some of the national parks.

I have been married to my wife Sarah since 2018; we met when we were in high school and she's been my best friend ever since. You can see her blog [here](https://scwiersdorf.github.io/).

I'm a command line addict; most of my work is done with Emacs. My current technology preferences are:

 - Emacs
 - [Selectrum](https://github.com/raxod502/selectrum) for somethings, [Ivy](https://github.com/abo-abo/swiper) for others
 - Zsh

Over the past year or two I've made some extensive modifications to my configuration. You can get my .emacs config files on [my GitHub repo](https://github.com/ashton314/.dotfiles).

This blog started out as a class assignment. Since then it's evolved into a place for me to write about some ideas and technology I'm excited about. I change my mind a lot; I'm still learning, so things written here should not be understood as an immutable reflection of my opinions.

If you'd like to talk to me about anything I've written here, try [Keybase](https://keybase.io/ashton314) or [Twitter](https://twitter.com/a_wiersdorf). If something is *really* urgent, you can find my email on my résumé, which should be linked on this page as well.

Commit message:

Add profile pic; Keybase -> Matrix

about.md, after:

---
layout: page
title: About
permalink: /about/
---

My name's Ashton Wiersdorf. I hail from Utah; I'm currently studying computer science [Brigham Young University](https://byu.edu). I've sung with the [BYU Men's Chorus](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Choirs_at_Brigham_Young_University) and I play the piano. Other hobbies include swimming and hiking—Utah has some of the most diverse landscape anywhere in the US: from dense forests to baren desert. If you visit, I highly recommend checking out some of the national parks.

![Me at a castle](/assets/img/me_and_a_castle.jpg)

I have been married to my wife Sarah since 2018; we met when we were in high school and she's been my best friend ever since. You can see her blog [here](https://scwiersdorf.github.io/).

I'm a command line addict; most of my work is done with Emacs. Over the past year or two I've made some extensive modifications to my configuration. You can get my .emacs config files on [my GitHub repo](https://github.com/ashton314/.dotfiles).

This blog started out as a class assignment. Since then it's evolved into a place for me to write about some ideas and technology I'm excited about. I change my mind a lot; I'm still learning, so things written here should not be understood as an immutable reflection of my opinions.

## Contact

I'm currently fascinated with the [Matrix](https://matrix.org) protocol, and it's now my preferred mode of contact. It's a little like email, except it's encrypted and more extensible.

My Matrix handle is: `@ashton314:matrix.org`

You should be able to connect via the [Matrix.to redirection service](https://matrix.to/#/@ashton314:matrix.org). If you don't have a client downloaded, you can use the [in-browser Riot client](https://riot.im/app/#/user/@ashton314:matrix.org). It will let you make a free account if you don't already have one.

I don't post my email on my blog directly, lest I get plagued with spam until the end of the internet. Since it's probably the easiest way for most people to contact me, you *can* find it on my résumé.

You can also find me on these platforms, though I might not answer quickly:

 - [GitHub](https://github.com/ashton314)
 - [Keybase](https://keybase.io/ashton314)
 - [Twitter](https://twitter.com/a_wiersdorf)
